\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename HOWTO.info
@settitle VMailMgr HOWTO
@setchapternewpage off
@paragraphindent 5
@footnotestyle end
@c %**end of header

@ifinfo
Copyright @copyright{} 1998 Bruce Guenter
@end ifinfo

@titlepage
@title Vmailmgr HOWTO
@author Bruce Guenter
@author Dan Kuykendall
@subtitle @today{}
@end titlepage

@ifinfo
This document explains how to setup VMailMgr support pop3 virtual domain 
services in conjunction with Qmail.
@end ifinfo

@c ****************************************************************************
@chapter Introduction

VMailMgr (an abbreviation for Virtual Mail Manager) is a package of programs
designed to manage multiple domains of mail addresses and mailboxes
on a single host.  It co-operates with qmail for mail delivery and
program control.

@section What is VMailMgr and why should I use it?

VMailMgr is a series of utilities for managing virtual domains, including:
@itemize
@item
a password checking interface for qmail, which replaces the usual
checkpassword, and
@item
an authentication module for Courier IMAP
@end itemize

These utilities provide access to the virtual mailboxes by one of three
methods:

@itemize
@item
IP-based virtual server access (invisible to the POP3 user)
@item
username-based access (virtual user logs in as @samp{username-virtualuser})
@item
hostname-based access (virtual user logs in as @samp{virtualuser@@virtual.host}
or @samp{virtualuser:virtual.host})
@end itemize

You should use VMailMgr if you prefer to have each domain controlled by a
seperate username, allowing the use of system quotas and better
security.

@section New versions 

The newest version of this document can be found on the VMailMgr homepage
@uref{http://www.vmailmgr.org/} in various formats, including the
texinfo source and HTML and plaintext versions.

@section Comments 

Comments on this HOWTO should be directed to the VMailMgr mailing
list.  To subscribe, send a blank email to
@email{vmailmgr-subscribe@@lists.untroubled.org}.

@section History 

This document was started by Bruce Guenter and reworked by Dan
Kuykendall, then by Charles Cazabon.

@section Copyrights and Trademarks 

Copyright @copyright{} Dan Kuykendall.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.1
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation

A copy of the license is available at 
@uref{http://www.gnu.org/copyleft/fdl.txt,GNU Free Documentation License}.

@section Acknowledgements and Thanks 

Thanks to Bruce Guenter for VMailMgr and the core of this
HOWTO.  Thanks to Mike Bell, who always seems to have the answers to
my questions. Finally, thanks to all those on the 
@email{vmailmgr@@lists.untroubled.org}
mailing list who have helped me, or asked the same stuff so many
times that I had to write this to stop the repeat questions.

@c ****************************************************************************
@chapter Installation

@section Get the files

Visit the VMailMgr website @uref{http://www.vmailmgr.org/} or one of its
mirror sites to download the package.  There are two primary methods of
installing:

@itemize
@item
from source

@item
from a binary package -- specifically, an @code{RPM} binary package

@end itemize

If you get the binary RPMS you will need at least the vmailmgr package.

@section Install with RPMS

To install from binary @code{RPM} packages, you can download the binaries,
or build them from the source RPM package.

@subsection Compiling the Source RPM (SRPM) Package

If you download the binary packages directly, skip to the next step.

Download the source rpm package (@samp{vmailmgr-@var{VERSION}.src.rpm}),
and then use the @code{rpm} tool to build the binary RPM package from it
with the @samp{rpm --rebuild} command as follows:

@example
rpm --rebuild vmailmgr-1.0.0-1.src.rpm
@end example

@subsection Installing the Binary RPM packages

After compiling the source RPM, the binary RPM packages will be located 
in the appropriate output directory (typically 
@file{/usr/src/redhat/RPMS/i386/}).

Install each package using the @samp{-i} option of @code{rpm} (i.e. 
@samp{rpm -ivh @var{PACKAGE}.i386.rpm}) as follows:

@example
rpm -ivh /usr/src/redhat/RPMS/i386/vmailmgr-1.0.0-1.i386.rpm
rpm -ivh /usr/src/redhat/RPMS/i386/vmailmgr-daemon-1.0.0-1.i386.rpm
@end example

@section Install from source

If you dont use RPM packages, you can install from source with the following 
commands. First, as a regular, non-root user:

@example
tar xzf @file{vmailmgr-@var{VERSION}.tar.gz}
cd @file{vmailmgr-@var{VERSION}}
./configure
make
@end example

Then, as user @samp{root}:

@example
make install
@end example

@c ****************************************************************************
@chapter Setup

In the following setup examples, it is assumed that your binaries are installed 
in the @file{/usr/bin]} directory, and configuration files are located in the 
@file{/etc/vmailmgr/} directory, as is the case if you installed from the RPMs.

If you installed from source, configure instead puts the binaries into
@file{/usr/local/bin/} and the configuration into
@file{/usr/local/etc/vmailmgr/} by default.

@section Setting Up a Virtual Domain

The following steps are necessary to set up a virtual domain with
vmailmgr (assuming vmailmgr has been compiled and installed). As an
example, we'll set up a virtual user @samp{me@@mydomain.org},
with aliases of @samp{myself@@mydomain.org} and
@samp{myname@@mydomain.org}.

@enumerate
@item
Set up a DNS entry for the domain. This is not covered here, as it
is dependant on far too many other things.  I will mention that to
make IP based virtual domains work a @samp{PTR} record which matches an
entry in virtualdomains is nessesary, for example, if nslookup
10.56.33.122 returns @samp{mail.mydomain.com},
@file{control/virtualdomains} needs an entry like
@samp{mail.mydomain.com:myuser}.

For the example, we'll assume that the mail exchanger for
@samp{mydomain.org} is already set up to point to your computer.

@item
Set up a base user for the domain.  Create a user, with a name of
your choosing.  Since the maildirs for all the users in the
virtual domain will be stored under this user's home directory,
make sure you set the user up in a partition or disk that is
appropriate for such storage. The tools that you should use to
accomplish this step vary greatly between different systems. For
our example, I'll add a user @samp{myuser}.

@item
Configure qmail to recognize the domain. To do this, you need to
modify two of qmail's configuration files in
@file{/var/qmail/control}: @file{rcpthosts} and @file{virtualdomains}.
@itemize
@item
To @file{rcpthosts}, add the line @samp{mydomain.org}. 
@item
To @file{virtualdomains}, add the line @samp{mydomain.org:myuser}.
@end itemize

If you wish to have mail to @samp{anything.mydomain.org}
be delivered in the same way:
@itemize
@item
To @file{rcpthosts}, add the line @samp{.mydomain.org}. 
@item
To @file{virtualdomains}, add the line @samp{.mydomain.org:myuser}.
@end itemize

@item
Configure @code{qmail-popup}/@code{qmail-pop3d} to use @code{checkvpw} as the 
password checker.  This step is dependant on how you have installed qmail.
@itemize
@item
Replace @code{checkpassword} in the command you use to
invoke @code{qmail-popup}/@code{qmail-pop3d} (either in
@file{/etc/inet.conf} or in a @code{tcpserver}
command) with @code{checkvpw}.
@item
And/Or at the prompt type @samp{echo checkvpw > @file{/var/qmail/control/checkpassword}}.
@end itemize

@item
Set up the vmailmgr files:
@itemize
@item
Either change user to the user you just created (for example,
type @samp{su - myuser}) or log in (with either telnet or
at the console) as the new user.
@item
Set up the base vmailmgr files by running @code{vsetup}.
@item
Use the included programs to add users and aliases.
For our example, we would type the following commands:

@example
vadduser me
vaddalias myself me
vaddalias myname me
@end example

@end itemize
     
@end enumerate

After you have completed all these steps, you will need to kill and
restart @code{qmail-send} to make it read the new
@file{virtualdomains} control file.

If you are using @code{inetd} to launch @code{qmail-popup},
@samp{kill -HUP} the @code{inetd} process as well.

@section Using one IP address for mutiple domains

There are two ways to log in without using multiple IP addresses. 

@enumerate
@item
The first way is to log in as
@samp{user@var{SEP}virtual.domain.org}, where @samp{user} is the
mailbox name of the virtual user, @var{SEP} is one of @samp{@@} or
@samp{:} (by default; this is configurable in the
@file{/etc/vmailmgr/} directory), and
@samp{virtual.domain.org} is the virtual domain's name, as
listed in @file{/var/qmail/control/virtualdomains}.

@item
The second way is to use the internal form of the mailbox name --
that is, @samp{baseuser-user}, where @samp{user} is the
same as above, and @samp{baseuser} is the username of the
managing user.

@end enumerate

For example, if @file{/var/qmail/control/virtualdomains} contains 
@samp{mydomain.com:myuser} and user @samp{myuser} exists and has
set up a virtual mailbox with the name @samp{me}, and the
@file{separators} configuration file @file{/etc/vmailmgr/} contains @samp{@@},
this virtual user could log in as @samp{me@@mydomain.com},
@samp{me:mydomain.com}, or @samp{myuser-me}.

@section Catching all misdirected mail in a virtual domain

In the @code{vmailmgr} configuration directory, there is a
file called @file{default-username}. If mail to a virtual
domain does not match any users or aliases in that domain, it is
delivered to the name listed in this configuration item if it exists
(which defaults to @samp{+}). To make this deliver to you,
simply type @samp{vaddalias + me}.

@section VMailMgr IMAP support

VMailMgr supports Courier-IMAP, but Courier-IMAP does not come with
an authentication module for VMailMgr.  This means that some minor
work is required for making the two work together.

The steps are:

@itemize
@item
Copy @file{/usr/bin/authvmailmgr} to
@file{/usr/lib/courier-imap/libexec/authlib/authvmailmgr}.

@item
Modify the @code{AUTHMODULES} statement in
@file{/usr/lib/courier-imap/etc/imapd.config} and add
@samp{authvmailmgr} as the first authentication module.
@end itemize

@section Enabling enforcement of virtual user quotas

VMailMgr supports per-virtual-user quotas, but not out of the box,
as it is not needed by the majority of users, and requires an extra
program to be run on each delivery.

To configure quota support, create the file
@file{/etc/vmailmgr/vdeliver-predeliver}, containing
the following:

@example
#!/bin/sh
/usr/bin/vcheckquota
@end example

This is executed as a shell script, so you will need to make it
executable by running the command @samp{chmod +x /etc/vmailmgr/vdeliver-predeliver}.

@section Enabling processing of autoresponses

Download and install the qmail-autoresponder package, found at
@uref{http://untroubled.org/qmail-autoresponder/}.

As with the above section, create a shell script
@file{/etc/vmailmgr/vdeliver-postdeliver}, containing the following:

@example
#!/bin/sh
if test -s $MAILDIR/autoresponse/message.txt ; then
  qmail-autoresponder $MAILDIR/autoresponse/message.txt $MAILDIR/autoresponse
fi
@end example

@section Web-based interfaces for vmailmgr

There are currently a few working solutions to administrate
your vmailmgr system via a web interface. Only requirement is
that the vmailmgrd daemon is running, and that you have
a webserver on your system.

@itemize
@item
For Python fans, there is vpyadmin by Bruce Guenter. The files can
be downloaded at @uref{http://untroubled.org/vpyadmin/}, and
the development code is online at 
@uref{http://bruce-guenter.dyndns.org/cgi-bin/vpyadmin/}
(sample.org / samplevm).

@item
And if you like PHP, you can use oMail-admin by Olivier Müller:
it fully supports all vmailmgr functions, and speaks englich,
french, italian, spanish, german and russian. Project homepage:
@uref{http://omail.omnis.ch}. Online demo:
@uref{http://admin.omnis.ch/omail/} (test.com / test).

@item
And there are also C-based CGI scripts in the @file{cgi}
subdirectory of the vmailmgr distribution.

@end itemize

@contents

@bye

