=head1 NAME

vadduser - add a virtual user

=head1 SYNOPSYS

B<vadduser>
B<[-c | --msgcount count]>
B<[-D | --no-mailbox]>
B<[-d | --directory dir]>
B<[-e | --expiry seconds]>
B<[-f | --forward address]>
B<[-P | --no-password]>
B<[-p | --personal string]>
B<[-Q | --hardquota kbytes]>
B<[-q | --softquota kbytes]>
B<[-z | --msgsize kbytes]>
B<username> [B<alias> ...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This program is used to set up a user within a virtual host.
If this program is reading from a tty,
it will then ask for a password (twice, to make sure you typed it in
correctly), otherwise it will read the password from the input with no
prompting.
It will then
add the user to the virtual password table in the current
directory and create a mail directory for the new user.
It will also add an entry for each of the named aliases.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item -c count

=item --msgcount count

Limit the number of messages in this user's mailbox to count.

=item -D

=item --no-mailbox

Do not create a mailbox for this user (forwards only).

=item -d dir

=item --directory dir

Set the path to the user's mailbox.
Note that this directory is unconditionally prefixed with "./".

=item -e seconds

=item --expiry seconds

Set the account to expire in the given number of seconds.

=item -f address

=item --forward address

Add a forwarding address to this user (this may be used multiple times).

=item -P

=item --no-password

Do not ask for a password, and instead set it to an unusable value.

=item -p string

=item --personal string

Set the user's personal information.

=item -Q kbytes

=item --hardquota kbytes

Set the hard quota value -- if the user's mailbox is this large or
larger, no more messages will be delivered to it.

=item -q kbytes

=item --softquota kbytes

Set the soft quota value -- if the user's mailbox is this large or
larger (but not larger than the hard quota), incoming messages will be
both bounced and received.
As well, an error message will be added to the user's mailbox.

=item -z kbytes

=item --msgsize kbytes

Set the largest message this user is allowed to receive.

=back

=head1 RETURN VALUE

0 if all steps were successful, non-zero otherwise.
If any of the steps fail, a diagnostic message is printed.

=head1 SEE ALSO

vsetup(1)

=head1 NOTES

You must have either created the users subdirectory by hand or run the
F<vsetup> program before using this program.

This program expects the environment variable C<HOME> to be set, and
executes a change directory to the contents of it before starting.  It
is also required that you change user to the domain owner before using
these utilities.

=head1 AUTHOR

Bruce Guenter <F<bruceg@em.ca>>.
