=head1 NAME

vchattr - change a virtual user attribute

=head1 SYNOPSYS

B<vchattr>
B<[-c | --msgcount | -e | --expiry | -E | --enabled | -q | --softquota | -Q | --hardquota | -z | --msgsize]>
B<[--quiet]>
B<value> B<username> [B<username> ...]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

This program changes the value of one attribute on a set of virtual
users.  It cannot be used to change the user's password or forwarding
addresses -- use B<vpasswd> and B<vchforwards> to accomplish those
tasks.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item -c count

=item --msgcount count

Limit the number of messages in this user's mailbox to count.

=item -e seconds

=item --expiry seconds

Set the account to expire at the given time, expressed in the number
of seconds since the UNIX epoch (midnight GMT Jan 1, 1970).

=item -E 0|1

=item --enabled 0|1

Enable (C<1>) or disable (C<0>) delivery to the virtual user's mailbox
directory.  This does not delete the mailbox or any of the messages
contained in or, nor prevent the user from logging in.

=item -q kbytes

=item --softquota kbytes

Set the soft quota value -- if the user's mailbox is this large or
larger (but not larger than the hard quota), incoming messages will be
both bounced and received.
As well, an error message will be added to the user's mailbox.

=item -p "string"

=item --personal "string"

Set the user's personal information string.

=item -Q kbytes

=item --hardquota kbytes

Set the hard quota value -- if the user's mailbox is this large or
larger, no more messages will be delivered to it.

=item -z kbytes

=item --msgsize kbytes

Set the largest message this user is allowed to receive.

=back

=head1 RETURN VALUE

0 if the given attribute was successfully changed for all users,
non-zero otherwise.
If any of the steps fail, a diagnostic message is printed.

=head1 SEE ALSO

vadduser(1)

=head1 NOTES

This program expects the environment variable C<HOME> to be set, and
executes a change directory to the contents of it before starting.  It
is also required that you change user to the domain owner before using
these utilities.

=head1 AUTHOR

Bruce Guenter <F<bruceg@em.ca>>.
